.wiki/Home.md, before:

# pray-calc-ml

A Python data science project that compiles human-verified Islamic prayer sighting records and
back-calculates solar depression angles. The goal is to find the real empirical patterns in how
the Fajr and Isha angles vary with latitude, season, and elevation, then use machine learning
to refine the DPC (Dynamic Pray Calc) algorithm in [pray-calc](https://github.com/acamarata/pray-calc).

## Pages

- [Data Collection](Data-Collection) — how to run the pipeline, add new sources, and expand the dataset
- [ML Crunching](ML-Crunching) — how to run the analysis notebook and train ML models
- [Architecture](Architecture) — how the pipeline works, data schema, quality filters
- [Data Sources](Data-Sources) — full citation table for all sighting records
- [Research Notes](Research-Notes) — academic paper summaries (not training data)

## Quick start

```bash
git clone https://github.com/acamarata/pray-calc-ml.git
cd pray-calc-ml
python -m venv .venv && source .venv/bin/activate
pip install -r requirements.txt

# Generate datasets (requires network for OpenFajr iCal + elevation API)
python -m src.pipeline

# Or skip the elevation API:
python -m src.pipeline --no-elevation-lookup
```

Output: `data/processed/fajr_angles.csv` and `data/processed/isha_angles.csv`

## Current dataset

| Dataset | Records | Locations | Latitude range | Date range |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Fajr | ~4,105 | 35 | -37.8° to 53.7° | 1985-2026 |
| Isha | ~43 | 20+ | -33.9° to 53.7° | 1985-2019 |

## Key finding

Near-equatorial sites (Malaysia, Indonesia, 2°-7°) show mean Fajr angles of 16°-17°, while
high-latitude sites (Birmingham, UK, 52°N) average ~13°. Seasonality is a significant second
factor — at 52°N, the Fajr angle has a ~3° peak-to-trough seasonal swing. Elevation shows a
smaller but real positive correlation.

The 18° fixed angle commonly used by ISNA and MWL overstates the observed true dawn angle at
virtually all well-documented sites.

---

*Part of the [acamarata](https://github.com/acamarata) Islamic computing library suite.*

Commit message:

Expand dataset to 5,871 Fajr / 46 Isha across 114 locations
Major additions:
- Extract all 1,621 Basthoni 2022 SQM records (46 Indonesian sites,
  Lampiran 2-5) via precomputed_angles.py
- Add 9 new raw sighting CSVs: Abdel-Hadi Malaysia, BRIN multistation,
  Kassim Bahali (2017+2019), Khalifa Saudi, Moonsighting.com,
  Shaukat 2015 Blackburn UK, Walisongo Sulawesi
- Curate aggregate D0 database (115 entries) in research/

Pipeline improvements:
- Open-Topo-Data SRTM30m primary elevation API with fallback
- APPROVED_RAW_CSVS allowlist prevents circular data ingestion
- Pre-computed angle merge path (bypasses back-calculation for SQM data)
- BAD_NOTE_MARKERS quality filter for excluded sources

Collection tools:
- BRIN multistation SQM processors
- PDF/HTML table extractor for academic papers
- Source tracking database (collection_manifest.json)

Documentation:
- Rewrite .wiki/Data.md and .wiki/Research.md from scratch
- Expand Data-Sources.md with full Basthoni Lampiran breakdown
- Add 14 researcher outreach drafts
- Update .gitignore to exclude bulk/experimental files

.wiki/Home.md, after:

# pray-calc-ml

A Python data science project that compiles human-verified Islamic prayer sighting records and
back-calculates solar depression angles. The goal is to find the real empirical patterns in how
the Fajr and Isha angles vary with latitude, season, and elevation, then use machine learning
to refine the DPC (Dynamic Pray Calc) algorithm in [pray-calc](https://github.com/acamarata/pray-calc).

## Pages

- [Data Collection](Data-Collection) — how to run the pipeline, add new sources, and expand the dataset
- [ML Crunching](ML-Crunching) — how to run the analysis notebook and train ML models
- [Architecture](Architecture) — how the pipeline works, data schema, quality filters
- [Data Sources](Data-Sources) — full citation table for all sighting records in the dataset
- [Data](Data) — sources log: all sources searched and their current ingestion status
- [Research](Research) — academic paper summaries and open questions about the data
- [Research Notes](Research-Notes) — detailed per-paper notes and regional analysis

## Quick start

```bash
git clone https://github.com/acamarata/pray-calc-ml.git
cd pray-calc-ml
python -m venv .venv && source .venv/bin/activate
pip install -r requirements.txt

# Generate datasets (requires network for OpenFajr iCal + elevation API)
python -m src.pipeline

# Or skip the elevation API:
python -m src.pipeline --no-elevation-lookup
```

Output: `data/processed/fajr_angles.csv` and `data/processed/isha_angles.csv`

## Current dataset

| Dataset | Records | Locations | Latitude range | Date range |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Fajr | 5,871 | 110 | -9.6° to 53.8° | 1970-2026 |
| Isha | 46 | 5 | -33.9° to 53.8° | 1985-2022 |

Total: 5,917 unique sighting records across 114 unique locations in 15+ countries.

Target: 100,000 per dataset. Only human-verified observational records are included. Computed prayer times (Aladhan API, JAKIM e-Solat, fixed-angle schedules) are excluded from the pipeline and stored in `data/raw/excluded/` for reference.

## Key finding

Near-equatorial sites (Malaysia, Indonesia, 2-7°) show mean Fajr angles of 16-17°, while
high-latitude sites (Birmingham, UK, 52°N) average ~13°. Seasonality is a significant second
factor: at 52°N, the Fajr angle has a ~3° peak-to-trough seasonal swing. Elevation shows a
smaller but real positive correlation. Desert sites across Saudi Arabia, Mauritania, and Egypt
cluster tightly around 14-15° with low variance (SD ~0.3-0.6°).

The 18° fixed angle commonly used by ISNA and MWL overstates the observed true dawn angle at
virtually all well-documented sites.

---

*Part of the [acamarata](https://github.com/acamarata) Islamic computing library suite.*
